Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about the hijacking
of the cruise ship, the Achille Lauro.
It’s a story that brings together
terrorism, guns, grenades, the Middle
East, and a diplomatic incident that
almost caused two close NATO allies
to turn their guns on each other.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
If you look up the definition of “cruise
ship” in a dictionary, you’ll probably
find something like “a large ship that
carries people on voyages for pleasure,
typically calling in at several places”.
For one American couple, Leon
Klinghoffer and his wife Marilyn, this
was exactly what they were hoping for.
They were celebrating their 36th wedding
anniversary and bought a ticket on the
Achille Lauro, a large ship that would
take them from Genoa in northern Italy,
around the Mediterranean, stopping at
Naples and Syracuse, then continuing
to Egypt, Israel, Cyprus and Greece,
before returning to Genoa 11 days later.
It would be a wonderful trip, one that
was firmly in the “for pleasure” category.
Leon Klinghoffer, however, would
never make it off the ship.
Or at least, would never
make it off the ship alive.
On October 14, 1985, his lifeless
body washed up on a Syrian beach, with
gunshot wounds to the head and chest.
Eleven days beforehand, he and 750
or so other passengers had embarked
at Genoa, in northern Italy.
The ship wasn’t a classic luxury liner,
but it was perfectly well-equipped:
two swimming pools on the roof, a
cinema, a gym, and cabins with private
balconies, which were something of a
novelty for cruise ships at that time.
Most of the passengers were Italian–it
was an Italian cruise liner after
all–but there were some Brits
and Americans too, as well as a
smattering of other nationalities.
There were also four young men
who kept themselves to themselves.
One of them had been on the same
cruise a few times before, which
seemed odd, but he had a valid ticket.
A member of staff recognised him and,
trying to strike up a conversation,
asked him where he was from.
He didn’t seem very interested in talking
and replied with one word: Norwegian.
This also seemed a little odd,
as he didn’t have classic Nordic
features: he had dark hair and olive
skin, he looked more like a southern
Italian or someone from the Middle
East than someone from Scandinavia.
Another member of the group, when
asked, said that he was Argentinian,
but he didn’t seem to understand when
a passenger engaged him in Spanish.
Odd, again, but the men had valid
tickets, they were paying customers.
Perhaps they simply
preferred their own company.
On Monday, October 7th, four days
after setting off, and after stops
in Naples and Syracuse, the cruise
ship pulled into Alexandria in Egypt.
The plan was for the
passengers to disembark and
go on a tour of the pyramids.
While this was happening, the ship would
make its way to Port Said, a couple of
hundred kilometres to the east, and the
passengers would rejoin the ship there.
And sure enough, most of the
passengers got off, climbed into
buses and headed off to visit one
of the seven wonders of the world.
Just shy of 100 passengers
remained on board.
Shortly afterwards, the four
quiet, odd, men revealed themselves
as not so innocent after all.
As the remaining passengers were having
their lunch in the ship’s dining room,
the men charged into the room with machine
guns, firing their weapons in the air.
There were shrieks and cries
from the terrified passengers.
The men were heavily armed:
guns, grenades, and ammunition
wrapped around their waists.
Quickly, they rounded up all the
passengers on board and frogmarched
them into the dining room.
The ship’s captain was called
and instructed to set sail
for the Syrian port of Tartus.
The captain had no option but to
obey, and the ship steamed northwards.
At the beginning, it was unclear who
these men were and what they wanted.
Their motivations seemed to be
political, as they said things
like “Reagan no good, Arafat good”.
Yasser Arafat, as you may remember,
was the leader of the Palestinian
Liberation Organisation, the PLO.
But the men hadn’t made any demands; they
hadn’t explicitly stated what they wanted.
It was also unclear how many
attackers were on board the ship.
They told the captain there were twenty of
them, but the captain could only see four.
And in fact, this claim of twenty
was a bluff; there were only four.
The men instructed the ship’s crew to
continue as if everything was normal, not
to send out any sign of distress or notify
the coastguard that anything had happened.
But before they had the chance to shut
down the radio systems, an officer
on the ship was able to send out an
SOS message, which was picked up by a
monitoring station all the way up in
Sweden, in Gothenburg, to be precise.
The Swedes notified their international
allies that this ship had been taken
hostage, and it was here that things
started to ratchet up a notch.
Given that there were Americans on
board, the US Defence Department
soon sprang into action.
Special forces were dispatched to
the region, and American allies
were instructed not to allow
the ship to dock, so that it
remained in international waters.
International waters, of course,
meaning that the ship wasn’t under
the jurisdiction of any country, and
could be stormed by marines without
it being considered an attack in the
sovereign territory of another nation.
The other major international
player here was Italy.
The ship was an Italian ship, it
had set sail from Italy, and most of
the passengers–and therefore most of
the hostages–were Italian citizens.
But Italy was more cautious
in its response than the US.
At this point, in the mid-1980s,
Italy had taken on the role of
something of a regional power-broker
in the Mediterranean, and had
been nurturing its relationship
with Arab states in the region.
Nobody had claimed responsibility for the
hijacking, and the men hadn’t yet issued
any demands, so the Italians were cautious
about pointing the finger at anyone.
Suspicion, however, fell immediately
on the Palestinian Liberation
Organisation, the PLO for short.
The gunmen had been expressing their
support for Yasser Arafat, the leader
of the PLO, and the international
community suspected the PLO was behind it.
Yasser Arafat, however, denied it.
And he didn’t just deny it; he
offered to send assistance in
putting an end to the incident.
The following morning, 24 hours after
the gunmen had stormed the dining
room, things became a little clearer.
The men started questioning the
hostages, asking their nationality
and taking their passports.
They were looking for British and
American citizens, Jews, in particular.
When they discovered that an
elderly man was Jewish, they hit
him over the head with their guns.
And at 11 o'clock that morning,
they issued their first demand,
via a radio broadcast to the Syrian
authorities, with an instruction for
the message to be passed on to Israel.
The men were from the PLF, the
Palestinian Liberation Front, and
unless 50 Palestinian prisoners were
released from Israeli prisons, they
would start executing the hostages.
Israel had until 3 pm: five hours.
Now, as a brief overview of the
very complicated situation in the
Middle East at that point, Israel as
a state was less than 40 years old.
Since its creation in 1948, the
region had seen repeated wars, mass
displacement, and a bitter, unresolved
struggle between Israel and the
Palestinians, a struggle that seems,
unfortunately, no closer to a resolution.
And by the mid-1980s, this conflict
was no longer confined to Israel
and the occupied territories.
Israel’s 1982 invasion of Lebanon
had driven Yasser Arafat and the
PLO out of Beirut, scattering
Palestinian factions across the region.
Hundreds of militants were in
Israeli prisons, and smaller splinter
groups carried out attacks abroad
to try to force prisoner releases.
One of these groups was the
Palestinian Liberation Front, the PLF.
It was loyal to a man called Abu
Abbas, and while it was technically
linked to the PLO—the main umbrella
group led by Yasser Arafat—it often
operated more independently, and
in this case, it’s believed without
Arafat’s direct authorisation.
So, to put it simply, it seemed like
these men were trying to use the
Achille Lauro as a bargaining chip.
They thought that with almost
a hundred hostages, including
Americans, the Israelis would
have no choice but to comply.
But there was a problem.
Both Israel and the United States
had a very strict policy of not
giving in to terrorist demands.
And with Syria refusing to let the Achille
Lauro dock, the ship was left circling
at sea, stuck in limbo with armed men
threatening to kill its passengers.
As the deadline approached, the tension
on board the ship was unbearable.
Hostages sat in fear, not knowing
if they would live or die.
The hijackers were growing more agitated.
The hours ticked by with no response.
As 3 pm approached, the
gunmen started to move.
By this point, the hostages had been
shepherded to an upstairs lounge.
That is, all but one of the hostages.
One man, a 69-year-old American
called Leon Klinghoffer, was
confined to a wheelchair and had
no way of making it up the stairs.
The gunmen, we can certainly use
the word “terrorists” at this point,
had decided to let him stay there.
And shortly before 3 pm, one of the
terrorists returned to find him.
He wheeled Klinghoffer to the rear
deck, out of sight of the other
hostages, and shot him, once in
the chest and then in the head.
He ordered the ship’s staff to
throw his body into the sea, and
importantly, not to tell any of the
other hostages what had happened.
When his wife, Marilyn, asked what had
happened to her husband, the terrorists
told her that he wasn’t feeling well and
had been taken to the ship’s infirmary.
Don’t worry, they told
her, you’ll see him soon.
The men informed the Syrian authorities
that they had killed one of the
hostages and would continue to do
so until their demands were met.
Pass on the message to
the Israelis, they said.
But the Syrians refused.
Syria, it seemed, would
be of no assistance.
A breakthrough came with the
help of one of the men offered
by Yasser Arafat to assist.
As a reminder, Arafat was the leader
of the PLO, and the terrorists
said they were part of the PLF,
a splinter group of the PLO.
One of these men, Abu Abbas,
secretly sent a message to the ship
using the code-name “Abu Khaled”.
The message instructed the men to
treat the hostages kindly and to return
immediately to Port Said, in Egypt.
When the hijackers heard this
message, they reportedly responded
very positively and immediately
ordered the ship to turn around and
head for Port Said, as instructed.
They hadn’t intended on
hijacking the ship, they said.
They had planned to travel to Israel and
launch an attack there, in retaliation
for the Israeli attack on the PLO
headquarters in Tunis a week before.
But there had been a mistake
and they’d had to change plans.
We’ll release the hostages,
don’t worry, they said.
Now, the irony here is that the man
who sent this message to the hijackers,
“Abu Khaled”, was Abu Abbas, the man
supposedly negotiating with the gunmen,
alongside the Egyptians and the Italians.
He was not some well-intentioned
peace negotiator.
He was the leader of the PLF and
the very man who had planned and
orchestrated the entire mission.
He was the terrorists’ boss,
not some kindly diplomat.
When the Americans joined the dots, and
realised his role in the mission, this
created a delicate situation indeed.
He was a PLO loyalist, and much of the
international community, including the
United States and Italy, had been trying
to foster closer relations with the
PLO, as its primary link to Palestine.
But this PLO loyalist had been outed as
someone who the terrorists recognised
by name, someone it looked highly
likely had organised the entire mission.
Still, if the PLO were accused,
there was the risk of the situation
blowing up, and Abbas seemed like
the best person to defuse it.
The ship neared Port Said, entering
Egyptian territorial waters
and making any kind of American
military intervention impossible.
The captain radioed in to the Egyptian
authorities and told them that everyone
on board was safe and unharmed.
The terrorists would release the hostages
on the condition that they would be
granted safe passage out of Egypt.
It seemed like diplomacy had prevailed.
The Italian foreign minister
proudly boasted of Italy’s role as
a mediator in the crisis, defusing
an extremely delicate situation
without a drop of blood being spilled.
In the afternoon of October 9th, the
Achille Lauro arrived back in Port
Said and the hijacking formally ended.
The gunmen released the hostages, and to
the relief of the Italian and American
authorities, the passengers walked free.
As you know, though, not
every passenger walked free.
The captain had told the authorities
that everyone was safe and well,
but he knew that Klinghoffer had
been murdered by the terrorists.
He had only lied because one of the
terrorists was pointing a gun to his head.
And when he told the Italian
authorities later that day about
Klinghoffer, this added a whole
new dimension to the situation.
The Egyptians, with the help of the
Italian authorities, had allowed
four murderers to get off scot-free,
and it looked like they were going
to help them flee the country.
And, what’s more, the
murdered man was American.
The Americans were furious, and
demanded the Egyptian authorities
prosecute the men, or to quote the
American ambassador, “we insist that
they prosecute those sons of bitches”.
But at this time the terrorists, now
outed as murderers, were about to board a
commercial flight out of the country, to
Tunis, where the PLF was headquartered.
So, to take stock, we have these
four men getting on this plane,
assisted by the Egyptian authorities.
In fact it’s not just the four men at
this point; it includes Abu Abbas, by
now clearly the leader of the mission,
but the man who was pretending to
be working with the Egyptians and
Italians to defuse the situation.
It’s now clear that a man
was murdered on the boat.
The Americans are furious, and the
Italians are sort of stuck in the middle.
A plan is hatched to intercept
the plane on its way to Tunis.
The Americans thought this would be
possible because Egypt had pretty
poor relations with Libya at this
point, so the plane would have to
go through international airspace.
And sure enough, as the EgyptAir
plane crossed the Mediterranean, four
US Navy F-14 fighter jets pulled up
alongside it, and instructed it to
follow them to a NATO base in Sicily.
The pilot tried to radio in to
the Egyptian authorities, but the
Americans had scrambled the airwaves,
making communication impossible.
Being tailed by American fighter jets,
the pilot had little choice but to agree.
It was forced to land at the
NATO base at Sigonella, on
the Italian island of Sicily.
And this is where the story
took an extraordinary twist.
The Americans expected to take
custody of the hijackers immediately.
It was an American mission,
a NATO airbase, and these men
had killed an American citizen.
It was an American problem to resolve.
But the Italians refused.
The Achille Lauro was an Italian ship; the
passengers were mostly Italian citizens,
and the crime, the Italians argued, had
been committed under their jurisdiction.
Tensions escalated rapidly.
At one point, American and Italian
soldiers faced each other on the
runway at Sigonella, the Sicilian
base, weapons loaded, in a
standoff between two NATO allies.
Eventually, after tense negotiations,
and Italian promises that the men would
be prosecuted, common sense prevailed.
The Italian authorities took custody
of the hijackers, arrested them, and
later put them on trial in Italy.
Abu Abbas, however, slipped away.
Despite being the mastermind, he was
allowed to leave Italy a free man,
supposedly because there wasn’t enough
evidence to prosecute him at that point.
He flew on to Yugoslavia,
then to the Middle East, and
for years remained at large.
The four gunmen, though,
would not escape justice.
In 1986, they were tried and
convicted in an Italian court.
One received a 30-year sentence,
two received life sentences, and the
fourth, who had cooperated with the
investigators, received a shorter term.
And as for the Achille Lauro
herself, it was not all “plain
sailing”, as the expression goes.
In 1994, while sailing off the
coast of Somalia, en route to
South Africa, and with almost 900
passengers on board, she caught fire.
The crew tried to fight the fire,
but it spread uncontrollably.
The morning afterwards,
the ship was evacuated.
Two passengers died in the process.
As the rest were ushered away in
lifeboats, they watched as the
Achille Lauro burned and slowly
slipped between the waves, lost
forever in the Arabian Sea.
And as for its legacy, it had
consequences far beyond the tragedy
of Leon Klinghoffer’s death and
the courtroom trials of the gunmen.
It shocked public opinion, hardened
attitudes against negotiating with
terrorists, and pushed governments to act.
Shortly afterwards, the world’s
major powers had agreed the SUA
Convention, a treaty that made ship
hijacking an international crime.
It was also seriously damaging
in Italo-American relations.
Italy’s decision to let Abu Abbas walk
free left Washington furious and exposed
deep cracks in the NATO alliance.
And for Palestinians, the image of
a murdered, wheelchair-bound tourist
was catastrophic, undermining Yasser
Arafat’s efforts to present the PLO
as a credible diplomatic partner.
So, as a final thought, the Achille
Lauro may now lay on the seabed,
rusting away, but its name remains tied
to one of the most infamous acts of
terrorism of the 1980s, one in which
only one person died, but that serves
as a reminder of how a single act could
shake governments, strain alliances,
and even change international law.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the Achille Lauro.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to hear
your thoughts on this episode.
Do you remember the Achille Lauro crisis?
How could it have been handled
differently, and what do you think some of
the long-lasting consequences have been?
I would love to know, and the place
for that is our community forum, which
is at community.leonardoenglish.com.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.